# ISIS: Funded by operation Gladio?

=> gemini://loadingdata.nl/ Home
=> gemini://loadingdata.nl/topic/ Topics
=> gemini://loadingdata.nl/topic/politics.gmi Politics

Last night I came across an article in the Dutch press (English version [4]) about how a group of 32 Kurdish Peshmerga fighters are currently receiving advanced weapons training in Germany, to learn to use the weaponry that Germany is selling to them.

This got me thinking about the checkered history with Germany (which has a large Turkish/Kurdish population) and the Kurdish Workers Party (better known as PKK) vs the Grey Wolves. Even earlier this month, a PKK leader was arrested in Germany [5] on charges of being part of a terrorist organization. Here's a quote from another article [6] from six years ago:

> "Germany has declared war on the PKK. We can fight back. Every Kurd is a potential suicide bomber." These combative words were spoken by Abdullah Öcalan, head of the Kurdish Workers Party (PKK) back in 1996, three years after the group had been banned in Germany.

## PKK and Peshmerga

What lead me to the PKK in the first place was the fact that hundreds of PKK fighters are now active in Iraq [7], fighting alongside the Peshmerga (Iraqi Kurds). And they're apparently making a difference:

> "The peshmerga forces withdrew from Makhmour, and the comrades [the PKK has Marxist-Leninist roots], stayed there, fought against ISIS and ISIS was defeated," Magid, the commander of the Kirkuk PKK group says, flashing a half smile.
> 
> "Afterwards, the peshmerga forces came with heavy weapons and they hit ISIS with Katyusha [Russian-made multiple rocket launchers]. When we captured the frontlines, there was only PKK." The guerillas were responsible for all eight Islamic State deaths, he added.

## Follow the rabbit

As I mentioned earlier, the PKK lead me to the Grey Wolves, a Turkish ultra-nationalist and neo-fascist youth party. During the 1980 military coup, they had as many as 200,000 registered members and were responsible for a string of assassinations against left-wing intellectuals. The PKK, being a left-wing separatist group with communist roots, quickly became a natural enemy. The Grey Wolves were used by Turkish intelligence to assassinate PKK leaders.

Reading the Wikipedia article [8], three factoids stood out.

(1) The Grey Wolves raised funds for the Chechen separatists, whom they consider their brothers. This is key, since Chechen fighters make up the core of ISIS.
(2) They fought on the Azerbaijani side against Armenia during the Nagorno-Karabakh war. They are still active there, under the name "Azerbaijan National Democrat Party".
(3) The Grey Wolves were part of the Turkish branch of Operation Gladio. A clandestine "stay-behind" operation in Europe during the Cold War, sponsored and coordinated by the CIA, that used false flag terrorist attacks in order to discredit the communists.

Isn't it interesting how the CIA, often through Operation Gladio, always pops up when you look into the history of armed conflicts? So there you have it, a real link between the CIA and ISIS, just long enough to be plausibly denied. And again, it falls into the old capitalist vs communist categories.

=> http://www.foxnews.com/world/2014/09/28/german-army-starts-training-32-kurdish-peshmerga-fighters-at-army-school-in/
=> http://english.alarabiya.net/en/News/world/2014/09/04/Germany-arrests-alleged-local-Kurdish-PKK-leader.html
=> http://www.tc-america.org/files/news/pdf/How_the_PKK_Operates_in_Europe.pdf
=> https://news.vice.com/article/meet-the-pkk-terrorists-battling-the-islamic-state-on-the-frontlines-of-iraq
=> http://www.wikiwand.com/en/Grey_Wolves
