# Chinese meat pie (牛肉馅饼)

=> gemini://loadingdata.nl/ Home
=> gemini://loadingdata.nl/topic/ Topics
=> gemini://loadingdata.nl/topic/random.gmi Random

During the Dragonboat festival (more commonly known as Zongzi Festival here) we took a family vacation to a countryside "hotel" over the weekend. We've been to the place before and keep coming back for the excellent food ☺

One of the dishes served (and one of my personal favorites) was Chinese meat pie. After posting some photos of how they're made, I've gotten a lot of responses asking for the recipe. Here's one from memory and taste-buds.

* Prepare a 3:2 dough (my patented recipe: 3 parts wheat flour, 2 parts water [consisting of 3 parts cold and 2 parts boiling water]). Knead it well, cover with plastic wrap and let it rest for 20-30 minutes.
* To minced beef (not too lean, or the pies will turn out too dry) add some water, soy sauce, salt, Chinese cooking wine, pepper and oil. Mix well until sticky.
* Dice onions, scallion and ginger. Mix this in with the meat paste. Add some more oil if needed to keep the mixture nice and sticky.
* Knead the dough again and divide into portions depending on the size of pie you want.
* Take one portion, roll it out into a circle (you're aiming for about 1-2mm uniform thickness.
* Pile some of the meat paste in the middle, fold the sides over and close the dough over the meat. Use some water to create a good seal.
* Dust some flour over the package and carefully press it flat. You're aiming for about 5-10mm thickness.
* In a frying pan, heat some oil and fry the pies on medium heat until golden brown on both sides.

=> https://goo.gl/photos/HykspcUbXq1AWJyP8 Photos on Google+
