# Allegiance propaganda

=> gemini://loadingdata.nl/ Home
=> gemini://loadingdata.nl/topic/ Topics
=> gemini://loadingdata.nl/topic/politics.gmi Politics

Oh so transparent...

I watched the first episode of the new NBC spy series #Allegiance [4] last night. It's so clearly anti Russian propaganda, the only thing missing is the literal line "Putin is behind it"...

The story: A young, brilliant, CIA analyst is brought in to help uncover a Russian plot for a major attack in the US, which will cause "massive loss of life" (queue 9/11). Unbeknownst to him, his parents are ex-Russian sleeper spies, who are once again recruited by their handler to try to turn their son in to a double-spy for mother Russia.

Though it looks like an enjoyable series so far, it disturbs me how obvious the propaganda of the military media complex is.

Here's how it works:

(1) Use mass entertainment to tell fictional stories about how evil the enemy is. This creates a vague uneasy feeling in the population.
(2) Use mass "news" to publicize only negative reports.
(3) Create alternative narratives, supported by blurry pictures and tweets, to make it look like an evil master plan.
(4) Ramp up the political rhetoric, ideally of the us-versus-them variety.
(5) Profit.

If you think this doesn't happen, read for example the statement of an editor of a major newspaper [5] who planted stories for the CIA.

=> https://www.youtube.com/embed/NXY4DuyjZo0
=> http://www.digitaljournal.com/news/world/editor-of-major-german-newspaper-says-he-planted-stories-for-cia/article/424470
